README.md, before:

# cf-crd-explorations

⚠️ **This Repository is for Experimentation Only** ⚠️

This repo contains WIP spike work done as part of our Cloud Foundry Custom Resources exploration.
It is not intended for external consumption nor are these the final definitions.
This is just a sandbox for exploring how the V3 Cloud Foundry APIs might be backed by Kubernetes Custom Resources instead of CCDB.

## Related Docs
* [Custom Resource Definition Explore](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_3V24s81jRWQZ08M2rgTzYp1MpTtYKeDuF8vZbM72J0/edit)
* [V3 Cloud Foundry API Docs](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.101.0/index.html)
* [Initial High-level Design Board](https://miro.com/app/board/o9J_lFiI8CU=/)

## Component Index
- [CRD Installation](#installation)
- [Webhook Installation](webhooks/README.md)

## Trying it out

### Cluster Pre-requisites

* Eirini Controller installed ([instructions](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/eirini-controller/blob/master/README.md))
* Kpack installed ([instructions](https://github.com/pivotal/kpack/blob/main/docs/install.md))
  * Follow the [kpack tutorial](https://github.com/pivotal/kpack/blob/main/docs/tutorial.md) for more information on how to set it up
  * Sample kpack resources are available in `config/samples/kpack`


### Installation
Clone this repo:
```
cd ~/workspace
git clone git@github.com:cloudfoundry/cf-crd-explorations.git
cd cf-crd-explorations/
```

Deploy CRDs to K8s in current Kubernetes context
```
make install
```

### Running the API and controllers
We currently don't support installing the API/controllers to the cluster, but you can run them locally against a targeting (via kubeconfig) K8s cluster

The spike code converts Apps, Processes, and Droplets into Eirini LRP resources which requires the Eirini LRP controller (see cluster pre-requisites above for information on how to install it).

It also produces staged Droplets from Packages and Builds using Kpack. You will need to configure the `REGISTRY_TAG_BASE` environment variable to let the controller know where Kpack built images should be published.

```
# Example: export REGISTRY_TAG_BASE=gcr.io/cf-relint-greengrass
export REGISTRY_TAG_BASE=<your-container-registry-here>
```

Then you will need to apply the sample kpack configuration:
```
kubectl apply -f config/samples/kpack/. --recursive
```

This config assumes you have added a `kubernetes.io/dockerconfigjson` secret named `kpack-registry-credentials` for interacting with the registry. Below is an example that uses a GCR service account:

```
kubectl create secret docker-registry kpack-registry-credentials \
--docker-username="_json_key" \
--docker-password="$(cat /path/to/service-account-key.json)" \
--docker-server=gcr.io \
--namespace default
```

To start the controller locally, run:

```
make run
```

Apply sample instances of the resources.
```
kubectl apply -f config/samples/cf-crds/. --recursive
```

**Note:** If you want the sample app to be routable you must update the sample Route CR (config/samples/sample_app_route.yaml) to point to the configured apps domain for your environment. Since we're leveraging cf-for-k8s for its Eirini installation the easiest way to make the app routable is by using the existing cf-for-k8s RouteController and Route CR.

#### Manually update the ImageRef on the sample Droplet
Since we do not have a spike implementation of staging or a Droplets Controller at this time (we expect to do this in https://github.com/cloudfoundry/cf-crd-explorations/issues/6), we have to manually set the image on the sample Droplet. To do this you must 

1. `kubectl proxy &`
2.
```
NAMESPACE=cf-workloads
DROPLET_NAME=kpack-droplet-guid

curl -k -s -X PATCH -H "Accept: application/json, */*" \
-H "Content-Type: application/merge-patch+json" \
127.0.0.1:8001/apis/apps.cloudfoundry.org/v1alpha1/namespaces/$NAMESPACE/droplets/$DROPLET_NAME/status \
--data '{"status":{"image": {"reference": "relintdockerhubpushbot/dora", "pullSecretName": ""}, "conditions": []}}'
```

### Interacting with the API
To experiment with the CF API shim, you can access the following endpoints and actions.

|       ACTION       |        URL       |
|--------------------|------------------|
| **GET** / **POST** | `/v3/apps`       |
| **GET** / **PUT**  | `/v3/apps/:guid` |
| **POST**           | `/v3/packages`   |

For example, you can get a list of applications by running `curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps | jq .`

#### Filtering Results
The `/v3/apps` endpoint allows filtering.

```
$ curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps?lifecycle_type=kpack
$ curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps?names=my-app-name,<new spec.name>
```

Note: non-existent filter fields will not restrict results. In the case of a bogus filter, all results will be returned. We should discuss what our intended behavior is in the future.

#### Creating or Updating Apps
```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/apps" \
  -X POST \
  -d '{"name":"my-app","relationships":{"space":{"data":{"guid":"cf-workloads"}}}}'
```


```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/apps/9f924342-472a-43a1-9db9-54beba5401e2" \
  -X PUT \
  -d '{"name":"my-app","lifecycle":{"type":"kpack","data":{"buildpacks":["java_buildpack","ruby"],"stack":"cflinuxfs3"}}}'
```

#### Creating Packages
In order to create a docker Package, the associated App must be created first.

```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/packages" \
  -X POST \
  -d '{"type":"docker","relationships":{"app":{"data":{"guid":"9f924342-472a-43a1-9db9-54beba5401e2"}}},"data":{"image":"registry/your-image:latest","username":"dockerusername","password":"dockerpassword"}}'

```

---

### Developing

#### Making Changes to the CRDs

* Golang CR Definitions live in `api/v1alpha1/`
* Apply Changes to re-generate K8s CR Manifests
```
make manifests
```

**NOTE:**

This will generate a file called `cf-crd-explorations/config/crd/bases/apps.cloudfoundry.org_buildren.yaml` with kubebuilder 3.1.0 you need to modify this file and rename it for the proper plural of build -> -buildren- builds to appear in K8s.
Refer to `cf-crd-explorations/config/crd/bases/apps.cloudfoundry.org_builds.yaml` for an example.

Commit message:

Updated controller with kubebuilder annotations
- RBAC for kpack resources
- Image for controller can be built with Pack, but start command will be
incorrect

Co-authored-by: Ashwin Krishna <krishnaas@vmware.com>

README.md, after:

# cf-crd-explorations

⚠️ **This Repository is for Experimentation Only** ⚠️

This repo contains WIP spike work done as part of our Cloud Foundry Custom Resources exploration.
It is not intended for external consumption nor are these the final definitions.
This is just a sandbox for exploring how the V3 Cloud Foundry APIs might be backed by Kubernetes Custom Resources instead of CCDB.

## Related Docs
* [Custom Resource Definition Explore](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_3V24s81jRWQZ08M2rgTzYp1MpTtYKeDuF8vZbM72J0/edit)
* [V3 Cloud Foundry API Docs](https://v3-apidocs.cloudfoundry.org/version/3.101.0/index.html)
* [Initial High-level Design Board](https://miro.com/app/board/o9J_lFiI8CU=/)

## Component Index
- [CRD Installation](#installation)
- [Webhook Installation](webhooks/README.md)

## Trying it out

### Cluster Pre-requisites

* Eirini Controller installed ([instructions](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/eirini-controller/blob/master/README.md))
* Kpack installed ([instructions](https://github.com/pivotal/kpack/blob/main/docs/install.md))
  * Follow the [kpack tutorial](https://github.com/pivotal/kpack/blob/main/docs/tutorial.md) for more information on how to set it up
  * Sample kpack resources are available in `config/samples/kpack`


### Installation
Clone this repo:
```
cd ~/workspace
git clone git@github.com:cloudfoundry/cf-crd-explorations.git
cd cf-crd-explorations/
```

Deploy CRDs to K8s in current Kubernetes context
```
make install
```

## Running the API and controllers

### Running locally
Run controllers locally against a targeting (via kubeconfig) K8s cluster

The spike code converts Apps, Processes, and Droplets into Eirini LRP resources which requires the Eirini LRP controller (see cluster pre-requisites above for information on how to install it).

It also produces staged Droplets from Packages and Builds using Kpack. You will need to configure the `REGISTRY_TAG_BASE` environment variable to let the controller know where Kpack built images should be published.

```
# Example: export REGISTRY_TAG_BASE=gcr.io/cf-relint-greengrass
export REGISTRY_TAG_BASE=<your-container-registry-here>
```

Then you will need to apply the sample kpack configuration:
```
kubectl apply -f config/samples/kpack/. --recursive
```

This config assumes you have added a `kubernetes.io/dockerconfigjson` secret named `kpack-registry-credentials` for interacting with the registry. Below is an example that uses a GCR service account:

```
kubectl create secret docker-registry kpack-registry-credentials \
--docker-username="_json_key" \
--docker-password="$(cat /path/to/service-account-key.json)" \
--docker-server=gcr.io \
--namespace default
```

To start the controller locally, run:

```
make run
```

Apply sample instances of the resources.
```
kubectl apply -f config/samples/cf-crds/. --recursive
```

**Note:** If you want the sample app to be routable you must update the sample Route CR (config/samples/sample_app_route.yaml) to point to the configured apps domain for your environment. Since we're leveraging cf-for-k8s for its Eirini installation the easiest way to make the app routable is by using the existing cf-for-k8s RouteController and Route CR.

### Run on Cluster

The deployment spec for the controller will need to have the `REGISTRY_TAG_BASE` env var set in order for the controller to understand where to publish images. See: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/define-environment-variable-container/

As when deploying locally, kpack will need to be configured and have a secret created.

To deploy to a cluster, run:
```
make deploy
```

### Manually update the ImageRef on the sample Droplet
Since we do not have a spike implementation of staging or a Droplets Controller at this time (we expect to do this in https://github.com/cloudfoundry/cf-crd-explorations/issues/6), we have to manually set the image on the sample Droplet. To do this you must 

1. `kubectl proxy &`
2.
```
NAMESPACE=cf-workloads
DROPLET_NAME=kpack-droplet-guid

curl -k -s -X PATCH -H "Accept: application/json, */*" \
-H "Content-Type: application/merge-patch+json" \
127.0.0.1:8001/apis/apps.cloudfoundry.org/v1alpha1/namespaces/$NAMESPACE/droplets/$DROPLET_NAME/status \
--data '{"status":{"image": {"reference": "relintdockerhubpushbot/dora", "pullSecretName": ""}, "conditions": []}}'
```

### Interacting with the API
To experiment with the CF API shim, you can access the following endpoints and actions.

|       ACTION       |        URL       |
|--------------------|------------------|
| **GET** / **POST** | `/v3/apps`       |
| **GET** / **PUT**  | `/v3/apps/:guid` |
| **POST**           | `/v3/packages`   |

For example, you can get a list of applications by running `curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps | jq .`

#### Filtering Results
The `/v3/apps` endpoint allows filtering.

```
$ curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps?lifecycle_type=kpack
$ curl http://localhost:81/v3/apps?names=my-app-name,<new spec.name>
```

Note: non-existent filter fields will not restrict results. In the case of a bogus filter, all results will be returned. We should discuss what our intended behavior is in the future.

#### Creating or Updating Apps
```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/apps" \
  -X POST \
  -d '{"name":"my-app","relationships":{"space":{"data":{"guid":"cf-workloads"}}}}'
```


```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/apps/9f924342-472a-43a1-9db9-54beba5401e2" \
  -X PUT \
  -d '{"name":"my-app","lifecycle":{"type":"kpack","data":{"buildpacks":["java_buildpack","ruby"],"stack":"cflinuxfs3"}}}'
```

#### Creating Packages
In order to create a docker Package, the associated App must be created first.

```
curl "http://localhost:81/v3/packages" \
  -X POST \
  -d '{"type":"docker","relationships":{"app":{"data":{"guid":"9f924342-472a-43a1-9db9-54beba5401e2"}}},"data":{"image":"registry/your-image:latest","username":"dockerusername","password":"dockerpassword"}}'

```

---

### Developing

#### Making Changes to the CRDs

* Golang CR Definitions live in `api/v1alpha1/`
* Apply Changes to re-generate K8s CR Manifests
```
make manifests
```
